Bellingham Math Circle          Grades K–1     Name


Problem 1: Fill the hexagon with pieces that are all the same color.
Which colors can do it? Under each piece, write how many pieces of that
color fill the hexagon.




                                    1
Bellingham Math Circle          Grades K–1      Name


Problem 2: Find different ways to fill the hexagon. Two ways are the
same if they use the same pieces. Draw each new way in one of the
hexagons below. How many different ways are there?




                                    2
Bellingham Math Circle           Grades K–1      Name


Problem 3: Fill each big triangle with green triangles. Write how many
green triangles it takes.




How many green triangles would fill a big triangle that is 5 green
triangles long on each side?


                                     3
Bellingham Math Circle           Grades K–1      Name


Problem 4: Fill each big triangle with blue pieces and green triangles.
Use as few green triangles as you can. Write how many green triangles
you used.




How few green triangles would a big triangle that is 5 green triangles
long on each side need?

                                     4
Bellingham Math Circle           Grades K–1      Name


Problem 5: Circle each shape that you can fill with blue pieces only. For a
shape you cannot fill, how do you know?




                                     5
Bellingham Math Circle          Grades K–1      Name


Problem 6: Fill the big triangle with as few pieces as you can. You may
use any pieces. Then do the same for the big hexagon. Write how many
pieces you used.




                                    6
Bellingham Math Circle          Grades K–1     Name


Problem 7: Put 6 green triangles together, edge to edge, to make a shape
that blue pieces cannot fill. Draw your shape on the grid. Then make a
shape from 8 green triangles that blue pieces cannot fill.




                                    7
Bellingham Math Circle               Grades 2–3       Name


Problem 1: A board is covered when every small triangle on it is under a piece.
Pieces may not overlap or stick out past the edge of the board. Which of boards A
to E can be covered with blue pieces only? For a board that cannot be covered, how
can you be sure?

                             A




                         B




                C




                                         1
Bellingham Math Circle       Grades 2–3   Name




                         D




                         E




                                 2
Bellingham Math Circle               Grades 2–3       Name


Problem 2: The gray triangles on boards F and G are holes, so they stay uncovered.
Can the rest of board F be covered with blue pieces? Can the rest of board G?


                         F




                         G




                                         3
Bellingham Math Circle              Grades 2–3        Name


Problem 3: Mark two holes on board H by putting a green triangle on each. For
which pairs of holes can the rest of board H be covered with blue pieces?

                         H




Problem 4: Can board J be covered with blue pieces?


         J




                                        4
Bellingham Math Circle               Grades 2–3        Name


Problem 5: Cover each big triangle on pages 5 to 7 with blue pieces and green
triangles. Use as few green triangles as you can.




                                                  Green triangles used




                                                        Green triangles used




                                         5
Bellingham Math Circle         Grades 2–3       Name




                         Green triangles used




                                   6
Bellingham Math Circle         Grades 2–3       Name




                         Green triangles used




                                   7
Bellingham Math Circle                 Grades 2–3        Name


Problem 6: A big triangle has sides that are 10 small edges long. What is the
smallest number of green triangles that can be used, together with blue pieces, to
cover it? How do you know that nobody can use fewer? What if the sides are 100
small edges long?

Problem 7: Place as many purple pieces as you can on the big triangle with sides 4
small edges long. How many small triangles are left uncovered? Answer the same
question for the big triangle with sides 5 small edges long. Is there any big triangle
where purple pieces leave fewer triangles uncovered than blue pieces do?

Problem 8: Is there a board that purple pieces can cover but blue pieces cannot? Is
there a board that blue pieces can cover but purple pieces cannot? You can draw
boards on the grid below.




                                           8
Bellingham Math Circle                  Grades 4–5         Name

Problem 1: Cover board A with blue pieces. Two coverings are different if some blue piece
is in a different place. Draw each covering you find in one of the copies of board A on
page 2. How many different coverings does board A have?


                          A




Problem 2: When three blue pieces fill a small hexagon, you can lift them out and put
them back the other way, as in the picture. This move is a flip. In the space on page 2,
draw a map of the coverings of board A: one dot for each covering, with a line between
two dots when one flip changes one covering into the other. Which two coverings of board
A are the most flips apart?




                                            1
Bellingham Math Circle   Grades 4–5   Name




                             2
Bellingham Math Circle                   Grades 4–5           Name

Problem 3: In a covering of board A, look at the blue piece that touches the top edge of
the board. Its bottom edge is flat, and another blue piece hangs below that edge. Keep
going down until you reach the bottom edge of the board. This chain of pieces is the
ribbon of the covering. Going down, each piece of the ribbon steps to the left (L) or to the
right (R). The picture shows a covering of a different board with its ribbon shaded. Its
ribbon is RLRR.
Which strings of L and R are ribbons of coverings of board A? Can two different coverings
of board A have the same ribbon?


                                           R



                                           L



                                           R



                                                   R




Problem 4: How many coverings does board B on page 4
have?
How many coverings does a hexagon have if its top and
bottom sides are 1 small edge long and its other four sides
are 4 small edges long, like the one drawn here?




                                               3
Bellingham Math Circle                 Grades 4–5        Name


                             B




Problem 5: Cover board C with blue pieces. How many different coverings does board C
have? Draw the coverings you find in the copies of board C on page 5.

                         C




                                           4
Bellingham Math Circle   Grades 4–5   Name




                             5
Bellingham Math Circle                  Grades 4–5          Name

Problem 6: Build covering X on board C. Change it into covering Y using flips. What is the
fewest number of flips that can do this?




                         X                                      Y

Problem 7: Which two coverings of board C are the most flips apart? How many flips apart
are they?

Problem 8: Start from a covering of board A, make flips one at a time, and stop when you
are back at the covering you started with. Can the number of flips be odd? Answer the
same question for board C.

Problem 9: The picture shows a covering of board C,
turned a quarter turn, with each piece shaded by the
direction it points. It can be seen as cubes stacked in
the corner of a box. What does one flip do to the stack
of cubes? How many cubes does the box hold when it is
full?




                                            6
